ApplicationDeployment controller technical design (#63)
radius-project/design-notes: architecture/2024-08-bicepdeployment-controller.md

# Radius BicepDeployment Controller

* **Author**: Will Smith (@willdavsmith)

## Overview

Today, users of Radius and future adopters of Radius use many Kubernetes-specific tools in their production workflows. Most of these tools operate on Kubernetes resources exclusively - which presents a problem when trying to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests. This design proposes the creation of a new Kubernetes reconciler in Radius called the BicepDeployment Reconciler that will allow users to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling.

> 

Reviewer: And for a point of comparison https://fluxcd.io/blog/2022/09/how-to-gitops-your-terraform/ exists.

Running terraform once lets you create something. Using Flux to run Terraform let's you continually apply the same state. This is what we're enabling but with Bicep.

## Today's Status

Today, Radius users are unable to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling. This is because Kubernetes tools do not understand Bicep manifests. Users must use the Radius CLI to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests.

## Terms and definitions

**CRD (Custom Resource Definition)**: A definition for a Kubernetes resource that allows users to define their own resource types.

**CR (Custom Resource)**: An instance of a CRD that represents a custom resource in Kubernetes.

**Bicep**: An infrastructure-as-code language that when used with Radius, can deploy Radius resources, Azure resources, and AWS resources.
 
## Objectives

### Goals

> **Goal: Users can use Kubernetes tooling to deploy and manage resources defined in Bicep manifests**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Goal: Users can use Kubernetes tooling to continuously deploy and manage resources defined in Bicep manifests**
```

> - With this work, users will be able to deploy resources defined in Bicep using only Kubernetes. We will essentially be providing a "translation layer" between Kubernetes resources (that Kubernetes tools can understand) and Radius resources (that Radius can understand).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- With this work, users will be able to deploy resources defined in Bicep using only Kubernetes. We will essentially be providing a "translation layer" between Kubernetes resources (that Kubernetes tools can understand) and Radius resources (that Radius can understand).
- With this work users can rely on the `BicepController` to repair drift from the desired state, and to perform disaster recovery. These are benefits users can't get from `rad deploy` or `az deployment create`.
```

**Goal: Users can quickly generate a Kubernetes Custom Resource from Bicep using the Radius CLI**
- We will provide a CLI command that generates the BicepDeployment resource from a Bicep manifest to make this feature easy to adopt.

**Goal: The behavior of BicepDeployment is consistent with user expectations for a Kubernetes-enabled tool**
- We will follow user expectations for Kubernetes controllers and resources when designing the BicepDeployment controller and resource. This includes building in support for retries, status updates, and error handling.

### Non-goals

> **Non-goal: Full support for GitOps**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Non-goal: (out of scope) Full support for GitOps**
```

### Architecture Diagram

![Architecture Diagram](2024-08-bicepdeployment-controller/architecture.png)

### Detailed Design

#### BicepDeployment Custom Resource Definition

The `BicepDeployment` CRD will be a new Kubernetes CRD that will be used to contain the ARM JSON manifest and parameters. The CRD will have the following fields:

```go
// BicepDeploymentSpec defines the desired state of a BicepDeployment
type BicepDeploymentSpec struct {
  // Template is the ARM JSON manifest that defines the resources to deploy.
  Template string `json:"template"`

  // Parameters is the ARM JSON parameters for the template.
  Parameters string `json:"parameters"`

> }

Reviewer: We need to include the provider configuration here as well. This is where the scopes for providers like `radius`, `azure`, `aws` get passed in.

Author: Take a look at existing CLI code where we do rad deploy
\

// BicepDeploymentStatus defines the observed state of the Bicep Deployment.
type BicepDeploymentStatus struct {
  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for this BicepDeployment.
  ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`

	// Scope is the resource ID of the scope.
	Scope string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

	// Resource is the resource ID of the deployment.
	Resource string `json:"resource,omitempty"`

	// Operation tracks the status of an in-progress provisioning operation.
	Operation *ResourceOperation `json:"operation,omitempty"`

	// Phrase indicates the current status of the Bicep Deployment.
	Phrase BicepDeploymentPhrase `json:"phrase,omitempty"`

  // Message is a human-readable description of the status of the Bicep Deployment.
  Message string `json:"message,omitempty"`

> }

Reviewer: Where are errors reported?

Author: update what gets described on kubectl get and kubectl describe

Author: Do we store UCP-structured error messages or parse it

	// BicepResourcePhraseDeleting indicates that the Bicep Resource is being deleted.
	BicepPhraseDeleting BicepResourcePhrase = "Deleting"

	// BicepResourcePhraseDeleted indicates that the Bicep Resource has been deleted.
	BicepPhraseDeleted BicepResourcePhrase = "Deleted"
)
```

#### `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` Command

The `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` command will be a new command that will generate a Kubernetes custom resource when provided a Bicep template and its parameters. The command will take the following arguments:

- `-p, --parameters`: The parameters for the Bicep template. Can be specified in the same way as [`rad deploy` parameters](https://edge.docs.radapp.io/reference/cli/rad_deploy/).
- `-o, --outfile`: The path to the output file where the `BicepDeployment` resource will be written.

#### `BicepDeployment` Reconciler

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new reconciler that reconciles `BicepDeployment` resources. It will have the following control loop:

1. Check if there is an in-progress operation. If so, check its status:
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile operation and continue processing.

>     2. If the operation completed successfully, then update the `status.phrase` field as `Ready`. Create `BicepResource` resources for each resource in the `outputResources` field returned by the Radius API. and set their OwnerReferences fields to the current `BicepDeployment` resource and their `status.phrase` fields to `Ready`.

Reviewer: 👍 solid

## User Experience

### Radius Container

**Sample Input:**

#### `app.bicep`
```bicep
extension radius

param application string
param tag string
param port int

resource container 'Applications.Core/containers@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'container'
  properties: {
    application: application
    container: {
      image: 'ghcr.io/radius-project/samples/demo:${tag}'
      ports: {
        web: {
          containerPort: port
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### `app.bicepparam`
```bicep
using 'app.bicep'

param application = ''
param tag = ''
param port = 3000
```

**Sample Output:**
```shell
rad bicep generate-kubernetes app.bicep --parameters @app.bicepparam --parameters tag=latest --parameters appnetworking.bicepparam --outfile app.yaml

Generating BicepDeployment resource...

> BicepDeployment resource generated at app.yaml

Reviewer 2: Should we call this ARMDeployment instead of BicepDeployment? It contains ARM compilation from Bicep, but it is not Bicep.

Reviewer 3: Please no references to a cloud provider-specific components in a cross-platform tool.

Author: Ideas:

ARMDeployment
TemplateDeployment
RadiusDeployment
BicepDeployment

Author: DeploymentTemplate

                "ports": {
                  "web": {
                    "containerPort": "[parameters('port')]"
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  parameters: |
    {
      "application": {
        "value": ""
      },
      "tag": {
        "value": "latest"
      },
      "port": {
        "value": 3000
      }
    }
```

## Design

### High Level Design

This design proposes the creation of two new Kubernetes custom resources and their corresponding reconcilers: `BicepDeployment` and `BicepResource`. The `BicepDeployment` controller will be responsible for deploying and reconciling resources defined in ARM JSON manifests via Radius, while the `BicepResource` controller will be responsible for reconciling individual resources. The `BicepDeployment` controller will have a control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation, process deletion, and process creation or update. The `BicepResource` controller will have a similar control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation or process deletion if necessary.

### Architecture Diagram

> ![Architecture Diagram](2024-08-bicepdeployment-controller/architecture.png)

Reviewer 4: it took a while for me to see the difference between the create/update and delete operations in the diagram. The call to create the my-app-container. Do we want to call it out?

#### `BicepDeployment` Reconciler

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new reconciler that reconciles `BicepDeployment` resources. It will have the following control loop:

1. Check if there is an in-progress operation. If so, check its status:
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile operation and continue processing.
    2. If the operation completed successfully, then update the `status.phrase` field as `Ready`. Create `BicepResource` resources for each resource in the `outputResources` field returned by the Radius API. and set their OwnerReferences fields to the current `BicepDeployment` resource and their `status.phrase` fields to `Ready`.
    3. If the operation failed, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.message` as `Failed` with the reason for the failure.
    4. Continue processing.
2. If the `BicepDeployment` is being deleted, then process deletion:
    1. Set the `status.phrase` for the BicepDeployment to `Deleting`.
    2. Check the cluster for and `BicepResource` resources that have this `BicepDeployment` as their owner. If found, set their `status.phrase` to `Deleting`.

>     3. If there are no `BicepResource` resources found, then set the `status.phrase` for the BicepDeployment to `Deleted`.

Author: I can add it here

## Overview

<!--
Provide a succinct high-level description of the component or feature and 
where/how it fits in the big picture. The overview should be one to three 
paragraphs long and should be understandable by someone outside the Radius
team. Do not provide the design details in this, section - there is a
dedicated section for that later in the document.
-->

Today, users of Radius (and importantly, future users of Radius) use many Kubernetes-specific tools in their production workflows, such as Flux and ArgoCD. The usage of these tools presents an issue when trying to integrate Radius - they can't deploy Radius resources directly since Radius resources are not Kubernetes objects. This design document proposes updates to Radius will allow users to deploy Radius resources by authoring Kubernetes CRDs, which will enable usage of Radius with GitOps tools as well as other Kubernetes-specific tools.

## Terms and definitions

<!--
Include any terms, definitions, or acronyms that are used in
this design document to assist the reader. They may or may not
be part of the user-facing experience once implemented, and can
be specific to this design context.
-->

> **CRD (Custom Resource Definition)**: A Kubernetes resource that allows users to define their own resource types.

Author: Let's add a definition for CRD, CR, etc. to disambiguate.

**GitOps** A way to do Kubernetes cluster management and application delivery. It works by using Git as a single source of truth for declarative infrastructure and applications.

**Flux**: A GitOps tool that automates the deployment of applications to Kubernetes clusters.

**ArgoCD**: Another GitOps tool that automates the deployment of applications to Kubernetes clusters.

## Objectives

<!--
Describe goals/non-goals and user-scenario of this feature to understand
the end-user goals.
* If the feature shares the same objectives of the existing design, link
  to the existing doc and section rather than repeat the same context.
* If the feature has a scenario, UX, or other product feature design doc,
  link it here and summarize the important parts.
-->

### Goals

<!--
Describe goals to define why we are doing this work, how we will make
priority decisions, and how we will determine success.
-->

> **Goal: Users can use Kubernetes GitOps tools (Flux, ArgoCD) to deploy and manage resources defined in Bicep manifests**

Author: do we feel like this is feasible? are there any edge cases with Bicep-defined resources where we feel like we would not be able to manage them all with one CRD?

Reviewer: For the Bicep controller, users can use **any** Kubernetes tooling. GitOps is our motivation for the project overall, but for this component we don't have a bias towards any specific tool. eg: Helm, Kubectl, Kustomize, KeptN, etc. 

Kubernetes is an API, and adding a controller for Bicep allows the API to manage anything Bicep can manage.

Reviewer: > are there any edge cases with Bicep-defined resources where we feel like we would not be able to manage them all with one CRD?

I'm not worried about this. Goal goal.

Useful thought experiment... if there were Bicep things that can't work - would be a design issue or "just" a bug?

- With this work, users will be able to deploy Radius resources using GitOps tools by authoring Kubernetes CRDs that contain Bicep manifests. We will essentially be providing a "translation layer" between Kubernetes resources (that Flux and ArgoCD can understand) and Radius resources (that Radius can understand).

**Goal: Users can deploy Radius resources using GitOps tools**
- We will be supporting the full suite of Radius resources in the BicepDeployment resource, so users can deploy any Radius resource using GitOps tools.

> 

Reviewer: I think another goal is something like:

> The behavior of BicepDeployment is consistent with user-expectations for a Kubernetes-enabled tool. 

And then give some examples related to deletion, retries, self-healing, etc.

we plan to do in the future, but are out of scope of this design, list
them here. Provide a brief explanation on why this is a non-goal.
-->

**Non-goal: Full support for GitOps**
- We will not yet be implementing automatic generation of BicepDeployment resources from Bicep manifests or querying Git repositories. This design will be covered in a separate design document.

### User scenarios

<!--
Describe the user scenarios for this design. Ensure that you define the
roles and personas in these user scenarios when it requires API design.
If you have an existing issue that describes the user scenarios, please
link to that issue instead.
-->

#### Jon can use GitOps to deploy a standard Radius environment for developer use

Jon is an infrastructure operator who uses GitOps to automate the creation of developer Kubernetes clusters. Today, he publishes Kubernetes manifests to a GitHub repository, and a GitOps tool watches the repository and applies the manifests to the Kubernetes cluster. He wants to have a Radius environment and a set of recipes available on the clusters for his developers to use, since they are building applications using Radius.

> He first sets up the Radius Helm chart as a dependency in the cluster, and then runs the `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment env.bicep --parameters env.bicepparam` command on his machine to create an BicepDeployment resource that contains the template and parameters specified. He then commits the BicepDeployment resource to the Git repository.

Reviewer 2: Minor edit: there are a few instances of "an BicepDeployment" appearing in this doc.

> He first sets up the Radius Helm chart as a dependency in the cluster, and then runs the `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment env.bicep --parameters env.bicepparam` command on his machine to create an BicepDeployment resource that contains the template and parameters specified. He then commits the BicepDeployment resource to the Git repository.

Author: Maybe let's not be so specific about the exact CLI command, we can talk about what the CLI command does instead

Author: or should do

When a developer creates a new development cluster using the configuration specified in Jon's GitHub repository with a GitOps tool, the BicepDeployment resource is applied on the cluster, and the Radius environment defined in the `env.bicep` Bicep manifest is deployed. The developer can then use the environment to deploy and test their applications using Radius.

> 

Author: let's add a non-gitops scenario, where a user can just use Radius to deploy Bicep resources using this feature (Azure resources?)

Author: In fact, we can probably remove the gitops-specific language here

#### Bran can use GitOps to deploy and manage a Radius application in production

> Bran is a developer who uses GitOps to automate the deployment of Radius applications to production Kubernetes clusters. His infrastructure team has set up a Radius installation and environment on the production cluster, and Bran wants to deploy his application using Radius. He has authored a Bicep manifest that defines the resources for his application and a Bicep parameters file that specifies the parameters for the manifest. He runs the `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment app.bicep --parameters app.bicepparam` command on his machine to create an BicepDeployment resource that contains the template and parameters specified. He then commits the BicepDeployment resource to the Git repository.

Reviewer 2: What is the "BicepDeployment resource" that is created? Is it a CRD?

Author: I'll update this to be more clear that `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment` creates a Kubernetes custom resource

> When the GitOps tool watches the repository and applies the BicepDeployment resource to the production cluster, the Radius resources defined in the `app.bicep` Bicep manifest are deployed.

Reviewer 2: Would Bran be using the production cluster or a dev cluster that was created in the previous scenario?

Author: In this case, a production cluster

#### Sam can use GitOps to patch a Radius application in production

> Sam is an SRE who is responsible for maintaining a Radius application in production. He notices that the application is experiencing performance issues and the number of application container replicas needs to be increased. He updates the Bicep parameters file for the application to specify the new number of replicas and runs the `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment app.bicep --parameters app.bicepparam` command on his machine to create an BicepDeployment resource that contains the updated parameters. He then commits the BicepDeployment resource to the Git repository.

Reviewer 2: Would replica count be defined with the application bicep?

Author: in the `.bicepparams` file

When the GitOps tool watches the repository and applies the BicepDeployment resource to the production cluster, the Radius resources defined in the `app.bicep` Bicep manifest are updated with the new parameters. The application container replicas are increased, and the performance issues are resolved.

> 

Reviewer: Does it make sense to scope these scenarios to `BicepDeployment`? These are the same end-to-end scenarios we have for Gitops overall right?

Author: let's move them out

## User Experience
<!--
If the change impacts the user experience, provide expected interaction 
flow we aim to achieve through this proposal.

When users interact with Radius through the CLI, include sample 
input commands and their corresponding output. Include a bicep/helm code 
sample, if this proposal involves updates to that experience.
-->

**Sample Input:**
<!--
Provide a sample CLI command input and/or bicep/helm code.
-->

#### `env.bicep`
```bicep
extension radius

param k8sNamespace string

resource env 'Applications.Core/environments@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'env'
  properties: {
    compute: {
      kind: 'kubernetes'
      namespace: k8sNamespace
    }
  }
}
```

#### `env.bicepparam`
```bicep
using './env.bicep'

param k8sNamespace string = 'demo'
```

**Sample Output:**
<!--
Provide a sample output for the inputs provided above.
-->
```
> rad bicep generate bicepdeployment env.bicep --parameters env.bicepparam --out env.yaml

> Generating BicepDeployment resource...

Reviewer 2: If "CRD" is a meaningful term for a user, and this command is generating a CRD, should we include that term in the command output and documentation?

Author: agreed

BicepDeployment resource generated at env.yaml

To apply the BicepDeployment resource onto your cluster, run:
kubectl apply -f env.yaml
```

> 

Reviewer: Nice!

#### `env.yaml`
```yaml
kind: BicepDeployment
apiVersion: radapp.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: env
  namespace: radius-system
spec:
  template: |
    extension radius

    param k8sNamespace string

    resource env 'Applications.Core/environments@2023-10-01-preview' = {
      name: 'env'
      properties: {
        compute: {
          kind: 'kubernetes'
          namespace: k8sNamespace
        }
      }
    }
  parameters: |
    using './env.bicep'

    param k8sNamespace string = 'demo'

> ```

Author: Do we need more fields in the initial CR?

Reviewer: Based on this design we need:

- Everything required to compile bicep:
   - Bicep file
   - Modules referenced as local files
   - `bicepconfig.json`
   - Do we need to know the version of the compiler?

- Everything required to execute bicep:
   - (compiler output)
   - parameter files? (can there be multiple?)
   - does it make sense to support additional non-file-based parameters?
   - configuration of `extensions`
       - eg: azure scope
       - eg: AWS scope
       - eg: Radius scope + application + environment

We might want to talk to the Bicep team about this idea sooner rather than later.

## Design

### High Level Design
<!--
High level overview of the data flow and key components.

Provide a high-level description, using diagrams as appropriate, and top-level
explanations to convey the architectural/design overview. Don’t go into a lot
of details yet but provide enough information about the relationship between
these components and other components. Call out or highlight new components
that are not part of this feature (dependencies). This diagram generally
treats the components as black boxes. Provide a pointer to a more detailed
design document, if one exists. 
-->

This design proposes the creation of a new Kubernetes controller (BicepDeployment controller) packaged within the `radius-controller` service.

The BicepDeployment controller will be implemented as a Kubernetes controller that watches and reconciles BicepDeployment resources on the cluster. The BicepDeployment controller will adhere to the following control loop for each of the BicepDeployment resources on the cluster:

> 1. When a BicepDeployment resource is created or updated on the cluster, the controller will compile the Bicep template and parameters into ARM JSON. If there are any errors during the compilation, the controller will update the `status.phrase` and the `status.description` of the BicepDeployment resource to indicate that the deployment has failed.

Reviewer: Do we store the compiler output anywhere?

2. Check if we have an "operation" in progress. If so, check it's status.
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile (polling).
	  2. If the operation completed successfully then update the status and continue processing (happy-path).
	  3. If the operation failed then update the status and continue processing (retry).
3. If the ApplicationDeployment is being deleted then process deletion.
	  1. This may require us to start a DELETE operation. After that we can continue polling.
    2. If the ApplicationDeployment is not being deleted then process this as a creation or update.
	  3. This may require us to start a PUT operation. After that we can continue polling.

>   

Reviewer: This is a good summary of the state machine 👍 Let's consider how to do deletion and then update it again.

1. The controller will perform some simple lookups to Radius to determine if the provided template can be deployed. It will make two checks:

>     - Check if the template contains an empty `param environment`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an environment ID (must have exactly one environment if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that environment.

Author: This is the kind of thing that the rad CLI does today and I figured it'd be easy enough to implement. let me know what y'all think

Reviewer: where do you think we'll get the application/environment names + scope?

>     - Check if the template contains a `param application`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an application ID (must have exactly one application if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that application.

Reviewer: One other detail, the CLI will create the application if it doesn't exist.

2. The controller will send the ARM JSON to the Radius API to deploy the resources. If there are any errors during the deployment, the controller will update the `status.phrase` and the `status.description` of the BicepDeployment resource to indicate that the deployment has failed and include the error message.

> > TODO: We need to figure out deletion of specific resources within the template. Let's discuss in the design meeting.

Author: This is a very important detail that I've left out of the design because I haven't thought of a good solution yet. I'd like to discuss in the meeting.

Reviewer: Let's dig into this. It's not too scary.

Author: https://github.com/radius-project/radius/blob/main/pkg/cli/deployment/deploy.go#L167

ALL of the important decisions like names. Your goal is to get an agreement
to proceed with coding and PRs.

If there are alternatives you are considering please include that in the open
questions section. If the product has a layered architecture, it's good to
align these sections with the product's layers. This will help readers use
their current understanding to understand your ideas.

Discuss the rationale behind architectural choices and alternative options 
considered during the design process.
-->

#### BicepDeployment Custom Resource Definition

The `BicepDeployment` resource will be a new Kubernetes CRD that will be used to contain the Bicep template and parameters for deploying Radius resources. The CRD will have the following fields:

```go
// BicepDeploymentSpec defines the desired state of an BicepDeployment
type BicepDeploymentSpec struct {
  // Template is the Bicep template that defines the resources to deploy.
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
  Template string `json:"template"`

  // Parameters is the Bicep parameters file that specifies the parameters for the template.
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional

>   Parameters string `json:"parameters"`

Reviewer: Do we need to support more than one of these?

Author: updated the design to support multiple param files

Reviewer: So the inputs can be multiple files, but they are stored on spec as a single file?

Reviewer: It's clear from the example now that this stores a stringified parameter file (JSON).

type BicepDeploymentStatus struct {
	// ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for this Bicep Deployment. It corresponds to the Deployment's generation, which is updated on mutation by the API Server.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=observedGeneration"`

	// Scope is the resource ID of the scope.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	Scope string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

	// Resource is the resource ID of the deployment.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	Resource string `json:"resource,omitempty"`

	// Operation tracks the status of an in-progress provisioning operation.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	Operation *ResourceOperation `json:"operation,omitempty"`

	// Phrase indicates the current status of the Bicep Deployment.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	Phrase BicepDeploymentPhrase `json:"phrase,omitempty"`

  // Description is a human-readable description of the status of the Bicep Deployment.
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
  Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`
}
```

> #### `rad bicep generate bicepdeployment` Command

Author: This name is very up for debate.

Reviewer: suggestion `rad bicep generate-krm` or `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` or similar.

Additional "words" adds to the command hierarchy. I'm not sure we're going to have additional `rad bicep generate <something else>` commands in the future.

#### BicepDeployment Controller

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new controller that reconciles BicepDeployment resources. When an BicepDeployment resource is created or updated, the controller will compile the Bicep template and parameters into ARM JSON and send the ARM JSON to the Radius API to deploy the resources. The controller will update the `status.phrase` and the `status.description` of the BicepDeployment resource based on the status of the deployment (see `BicepDeploymentPhrase` above).

The controller will also perform some simple lookups to Radius to determine if the provided template can be deployed. It will make two checks:
- Check if the template contains an empty `param environment`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an environment ID (must have exactly one environment if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that environment.
- Check if the template contains a `param application`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an application ID (must have exactly one application if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that application.

> The controller will also be shipped with a Bicep binary which will allow it to compile Bicep templates and parameters into ARM JSON. The Bicep binary will be included in the `radius-controller` container image.

Author: This will require us to change the base container image to something like `ubuntu` which has the right libraries for running the bicep binary.

Reviewer: There are other ways to solve this problem 😆

### Alternatives Considered

> - We could create a separate service for Bicep compilation.

Reviewer: We could also do compilation as part of the CLI command, or as part of the GitOps integration (Flux Controller + ArgoCD custom tool).

paragraphs long and should be understandable by someone outside the Radius
team. Do not provide the design details in this, section - there is a
dedicated section for that later in the document.
-->

Today, users of Radius and future adopters of Radius use many Kubernetes-specific tools in their production workflows. Most of these tools operate on Kubernetes resources exclusively - which presents a problem when trying to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests. This design proposes the creation of a new Kubernetes controller (BicepDeployment controller) in Radius that will allow users to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling.

## Terms and definitions

<!--
Include any terms, definitions, or acronyms that are used in
this design document to assist the reader. They may or may not
be part of the user-facing experience once implemented, and can
be specific to this design context.
-->

**CRD (Custom Resource Definition)**: A definition for a Kubernetes resource that allows users to define their own resource types.

**CR (Custom Resource)**: An instance of a CRD that represents a custom resource in Kubernetes.

> **Bicep**: A Domain Specific Language (DSL) for defining Azure resources, or when used with Radius, Azure resources, AWS resources, and Radius resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bicep**: An infrastructure-as-code language for defining Azure resources, or when used with Radius, Azure resources, AWS resources, and Radius resources.
```

It's not-not a DSL 👍 IaC is more specific and the term we usually use. 

I think you could also simplify a big and remove the "for defining Azure resources" part, it's not super relevant.

## Objectives

<!--
Describe goals/non-goals and user-scenario of this feature to understand
the end-user goals.
* If the feature shares the same objectives of the existing design, link
  to the existing doc and section rather than repeat the same context.
* If the feature has a scenario, UX, or other product feature design doc,
  link it here and summarize the important parts.
-->

> 

Author: What's the status today? "So what?"

- With this work, users will be able to deploy resources defined in Bicep using only Kubernetes. We will essentially be providing a "translation layer" between Kubernetes resources (that Kubernetes tools can understand) and Radius resources (that Radius can understand).

**Goal: Users can quickly generate a Kubernetes CR from Bicep using the Radius CLI**
- We will provide a CLI command that generates the BicepDeployment resource from a Bicep manifest to make this feature easy to adopt.

**Goal: The behavior of BicepDeployment is consistent with user expectations for a Kubernetes-enabled tool**
- We will follow user expectations for Kubernetes controllers and resources when designing the BicepDeployment controller and resource. This includes building in support for retries, status updates, and error handling.

### Non-goals

<!--
Describe non-goals to identify something that we won’t be focusing on 
immediately. We won’t be expending any effort on these matters. If there
will be follow-ups after this work, list them here. If there are things
we plan to do in the future, but are out of scope of this design, list
them here. Provide a brief explanation on why this is a non-goal.

> -->

Reviewer: I think we'll end up with a non-goal here about the complexity of tooling we're building, or the idea of reimplementing functionality thats in the bicep compiler. Let's discuss in the context of your multi-file examples.

#### Jon can deploy Radius resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tools

Now that he can see that Radius can deploy cloud resources defined in Bicep manifests, Jon wants to take advantage of Radius tooling, such as the App Graph, and fully "Rad-ify" his application. He writes a Bicep manifest that defines a Radius container that connects to the cloud resources, and uses the rad CLI to generate a custom resource from the Bicep manifest. Jon applies the custom resource to his cluster, and Radius deploys the Radius resources defined in the Bicep manifest. Now, Jon can take advantage of Radius tooling, such as the Radius Dashboard and App Graph, to manage his application.

> 

Reviewer: Scenarios look much better and focused on the design proposal. Nice!

sample, if this proposal involves updates to that experience.
-->

### Radius Container

**Sample Input:**
<!--
Provide a sample CLI command input and/or bicep/helm code.
-->

#### `app.bicep`
```bicep
extension radius

param application string
param tag string
param port int

resource container 'Applications.Core/containers@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'container'
  properties: {
    application: application
    container: {
      image: 'ghcr.io/radius-project/samples/demo:${tag}'
      ports: {
        web: {
          containerPort: port
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### `app.bicepparam`
```bicep
using 'app.bicep'

param application = ''
param tag = ''
```

#### `appnetworking.bicepparam
```bicep
using 'app.bicep'

param port = 3000
```

**Sample Output:**
<!--
Provide a sample output for the inputs provided above.
-->
```
> rad bicep generate-kubernetes app.bicep --parameters @app.bicepparam --parameters tag=latest --parameters appnetworking.bicepparam --outfile env.yaml

Generating BicepDeployment resource...
BicepDeployment resource generated at env.yaml

To apply the BicepDeployment resource onto your cluster, run:
kubectl apply -f app.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: I like the depth here:

- Multiple parameter files
- Additional parameters passed at the command line

#### `app.yaml`
```yaml
kind: BicepDeployment
apiVersion: radapp.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: env
  namespace: radius-system
spec:
  template: |
    extension radius

    param application string
    param tag string
    param port int

    resource container 'Applications.Core/containers@2023-10-01-preview' = {
      name: 'container'
      properties: {
        application: application
        container: {
          image: 'ghcr.io/radius-project/samples/demo:${tag}'
          ports: {
            web: {
              containerPort: port
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  parameters: |
    application=''
    tag='latest'

>     port=3000

Reviewer: Do we need to implement the "merge" of parameters into a single file? Any edge cases to worry about?

kubectl apply -f main.yaml
```

#### `main.yaml`
```yaml
kind: BicepDeployment
apiVersion: radapp.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: env
  namespace: radius-system
spec:
  template: |
    param location string = resourceGroup().location
    param storageAccountName string

    // Import the storage module
    module storageModule 'storage.bicep' = {
      name: 'storageModule'
      params: {
        location: location
        storageAccountName: storageAccountName
      }
    }

    // Output the storage account ID
    output storageAccountId string = storageModule.outputs.storageAccountId
  modules:
    - name: storageModule
      template: |
        param location string
        param storageAccountName string

        // Create a storage account
        resource storageAccount 'Microsoft.Storage/storageAccounts@2021-04-01' = {
          name: storageAccountName
          location: location
          sku: {
            name: 'Standard_LRS'
          }
          kind: 'StorageV2'
          properties: {}
        }

        // Output the storage account ID
        output storageAccountId string = storageAccount.id
  parameters: |

>     storageAccountName=myaccount

Reviewer: This is a great example because it surfaces the complexity of moving the compilation to the server. 

Did you look into how the Bicep compiler handles this? What does the compiler output look like? Multiple files or a single file?

	BicepDeploymentPhraseDeleted BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Deleted"
)

// BicepDeploymentStatus defines the observed state of the Bicep Deployment.
type BicepDeploymentStatus struct {
	// ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for this Bicep Deployment. It corresponds to the Deployment's generation, which is updated on mutation by the API Server.
	ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=observedGeneration"`

	// Scope is the resource ID of the scope.
	Scope string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

	// Resource is the resource ID of the deployment.
	Resource string `json:"resource,omitempty"`

	// Operation tracks the status of an in-progress provisioning operation.
	Operation *ResourceOperation `json:"operation,omitempty"`

	// Phrase indicates the current status of the Bicep Deployment.
	Phrase BicepDeploymentPhrase `json:"phrase,omitempty"`

  // Description is a human-readable description of the status of the Bicep Deployment.
  Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`

  // Resources is a list of resources that are created by the BicepDeployment.

>   Resources []BicepDeploymentResource `json:"resources,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Great 👍 what does `BicepDeploymentResource` contain?

Reviewer 5: Safe to assume we don't need to worry about secret exposure if full resource bodies are being returned?

> }

Reviewer: Do we need `outputs`? to be captured here?

Reviewer 5: Unless I'm missing it, you'll also need a means of surfacing errors.

```

#### `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` Command

The `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` command will be a new command that will generate a Kubernetes custom resource when provided a Bicep template, modules, and parameters The command will take the following arguments:

> - `-p, --parameters`: The parameters for the Bicep template. Can be specified in the same way as [`rad deploy` parameters](https://edge.docs.radapp.io/reference/cli/rad_deploy/).

Reviewer: 👍

- `-o, --outfile`: The path to the output file where the BicepDeployment resource will be written.

#### BicepDeployment Controller

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new controller that reconciles BicepDeployment resources. It will have the following control loop:

 The BicepDeployment controller will adhere to the following control loop for BicepDeployment resources on the cluster:

1. Check if there is an in-progress operation. If so, check its status:
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile operation and continue processing.
	  2. If the operation completed successfully, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` fields as succeeded. Set the contents of the `status.resources` to match the set of deployed resources. This operation is complete, so we can continue processing.
	  3. If the operation failed, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` as failed and continue processing.
2. If the BicepDeployment is being deleted, then process deletion:

>     1. Queue a DELETE operation for each of the resources in the `status.resources` list.

Author: Let's think about each of the "tracked resources" as their own resources so that they can manage their own async lifecycle.

    1. Compile the Bicep template, modules, and parameters into ARM JSON.
    1. The controller will perform some simple lookups to Radius to determine if the provided template can be deployed:
        - Check if the template contains an empty `param environment`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an environment ID (must have exactly one environment if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that environment.
        - Check if the template contains an empty `param application`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an application ID. If there is exactly one application present, the controller will deploy the template using that application. If there are no applications, then the controller will create one.
    2. Queue a PUT operation against the Radius API to deploy compiled ARM JSON.

The controller will also be shipped with a Bicep binary and a `bicepconfig.json` which will allow it to compile Bicep templates and parameters into ARM JSON. The Bicep binary will be included in the `radius-controller` container image.

### Alternatives Considered

- We could create a separate service for Bicep compilation.

> - We could move the compilation of Bicep to the user's CLI (client-side build vs. server-side build).

Reviewer: Sounds like we know enough to decide this now.

could implement your design and provide enough detail to get a high confidence
estimate of the cost to implement the feature but isn’t as detailed as the 
code. Be sure to also consider testability in your design.

For each change, give each "change" in the proposal its own section and
describe it in enough detail that someone else could implement it. Cover
ALL of the important decisions like names. Your goal is to get an agreement
to proceed with coding and PRs.

If there are alternatives you are considering please include that in the open
questions section. If the product has a layered architecture, it's good to
align these sections with the product's layers. This will help readers use
their current understanding to understand your ideas.

Discuss the rationale behind architectural choices and alternative options 
considered during the design process.
-->

#### BicepDeployment Custom Resource Definition

The `BicepDeployment` resource will be a new Kubernetes CRD that will be used to contain the Bicep template and parameters for deploying Radius resources. The CRD will have the following fields:

```go
// BicepDeploymentSpec defines the desired state of a BicepDeployment

> type BicepDeploymentSpec struct {

Reviewer 5: You may also need to include the user's `bicepconfig.json` files if they have any that are picked up in the compilation. This is something we don't currently represent as "part of" the compilation, but probably should be...

Reviewer: Is this relevant if the `BicepDeploymentSpec` contains ARM-JSON instead of Bicep? I think we changed the design since you left this comment, but I wanted to be sure.

  // Template is the Bicep template that defines the resources to deploy.

>   Template string `json:"template"`

Reviewer 5: Internally, we usually represent a Bicep compilation as a dictionary of "uri -> file contents", along with an "entrypoint URI" (either a .bicep or .bicepparam file)

So for example:
```typescript
const compilation = {
  files: {
    'file:///path/to/main.bicepparam': `
using '../main.bicep'
`,
    'file:///path/main.bicep': `
import { foo } from 'other/foo.bicep'
`,
    'file:///path/other/foo.bicep': `
@export()
var foo = 'bar'
`,
  },
  entryPoint: 'file:///path/to/main.bicepparam'
}
```

The other thing to note is that files don't have to be "text" - we also allow loading binary files:
```bicep
var test = loadFileAsBase64('foo.bin')
```

Reviewer: A better question might be why you support non-utf8 encodings 😆

  // Parameters is the Bicep parameters file that specifies the parameters for the template.
  Parameters string `json:"parameters"`

  // Modules is a list of Bicep modules that are used in the template.

>   Modules []BicepDeploymentModule `json:"modules,omitempty"`

Reviewer 5: BTW, we have similar challenges with supporting Bicep in other places (e.g. "natively" in Azure Deployment APIs, and in the Azure Portal). I'm interested to see if the solution here applies elsewhere!

    1. Queue a DELETE operation for each of the resources in the `status.resources` list.
    2. After all resources are deleted, update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` fields as deleted.
3. If the BicepDeployment is not being deleted then process this as a create or update:
    1. Compile the Bicep template, modules, and parameters into ARM JSON.
    1. The controller will perform some simple lookups to Radius to determine if the provided template can be deployed:
        - Check if the template contains an empty `param environment`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an environment ID (must have exactly one environment if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that environment.
        - Check if the template contains an empty `param application`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an application ID. If there is exactly one application present, the controller will deploy the template using that application. If there are no applications, then the controller will create one.
    2. Queue a PUT operation against the Radius API to deploy compiled ARM JSON.

> The controller will also be shipped with a Bicep binary and a `bicepconfig.json` which will allow it to compile Bicep templates and parameters into ARM JSON. The Bicep binary will be included in the `radius-controller` container image.

Reviewer 5: > The Bicep binary will be included in the `radius-controller` container image.

Definitely worth thinking this decision through carefully - coupling the two versions together means you'll be on a treadmill keeping the image updated. If there's a bug or breaking change in Bicep, people may want to downgrade without changing the controller version. Or if there's a new feature in Bicep, people may not want to be forced to upgrade the container image to access it.

> The controller will also be shipped with a Bicep binary and a `bicepconfig.json` which will allow it to compile Bicep templates and parameters into ARM JSON. The Bicep binary will be included in the `radius-controller` container image.

Reviewer 5: https://github.com/Azure/bicep/issues/12290 is something you might be interested in.

# Radius BicepDeployment Controller

* **Author**: Will Smith (@willdavsmith)

## Overview

<!--
Provide a succinct high-level description of the component or feature and 
where/how it fits in the big picture. The overview should be one to three 
paragraphs long and should be understandable by someone outside the Radius
team. Do not provide the design details in this, section - there is a
dedicated section for that later in the document.
-->

> Today, users of Radius and future adopters of Radius use many Kubernetes-specific tools in their production workflows. Most of these tools operate on Kubernetes resources exclusively - which presents a problem when trying to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests. This design proposes the creation of a new Kubernetes reconciler in Radius called the BicepDeployment Reconciler that will allow users to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling.

Reviewer 6: This will require an update to the Controller Threat Model 🤣

Reviewer: Will it really?

> Today, users of Radius and future adopters of Radius use many Kubernetes-specific tools in their production workflows. Most of these tools operate on Kubernetes resources exclusively - which presents a problem when trying to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests. This design proposes the creation of a new Kubernetes reconciler in Radius called the BicepDeployment Reconciler that will allow users to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling.

Reviewer 3: In the future, we will want to support ways to model applications other than Bicep. I'm guessing that you are assuming that Radius will always translate an application definition into Bicep. Is that the assumption? Should this be more of a Radius deployment controller?

Author: This is true, but we'll have different ways of handling different IAC techniques. This design is specific to Bicep.

## Today's Status

Today, Radius users are unable to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tooling. This is because Kubernetes tools do not understand Bicep manifests. Users must use the Radius CLI to deploy resources defined in Bicep manifests.

> ## Terms and definitions

Reviewer 3: Defining what we mean by Kubernetes tools would be helpful. It doesn't have to be an exhaustive list, but listing their commonalities would help.

### Non-goals

<!--
Describe non-goals to identify something that we won’t be focusing on 
immediately. We won’t be expending any effort on these matters. If there
will be follow-ups after this work, list them here. If there are things
we plan to do in the future, but are out of scope of this design, list
them here. Provide a brief explanation on why this is a non-goal.
-->

**Non-goal: Full support for GitOps**

- We will not yet be implementing automatic generation of BicepDeployment resources from Bicep manifests or querying Git repositories. This design will enable this work, and it will be covered in a future design document.

### User scenarios

<!--
Describe the user scenarios for this design. Ensure that you define the
roles and personas in these user scenarios when it requires API design.
If you have an existing issue that describes the user scenarios, please
link to that issue instead.
-->

#### Jon can deploy cloud (Azure or AWS) resources defined in Bicep manifests using Kubernetes tools

> Jon is an infrastructure operator for an enterprise company. His team manages a production application that is deployed on Kubernetes and uses cloud resources. Jon wants to declare all dependencies for his application in Kubernetes manifests, including cloud resources. He installs Radius on his cluster and uses the rad CLI to generate a custom resource from his Bicep manifest. Jon applies the custom resource to his cluster, and Radius deploys the cloud resources defined in the Bicep manifest. If he wants to update or delete the cloud resources, he can do so by re-applying the updated custom resource or deleting the custom resource.

Author: reword the "kubernetes manifests" part

Author: let's be clear about "target audience", someone already using Bicep

## User Experience
<!--
If the change impacts the user experience, provide expected interaction 
flow we aim to achieve through this proposal.

When users interact with Radius through the CLI, include sample 
input commands and their corresponding output. Include a bicep/helm code 
sample, if this proposal involves updates to that experience.
-->

### Radius Container

**Sample Input:**
<!--
Provide a sample CLI command input and/or bicep/helm code.
-->

#### `app.bicep`
```bicep
extension radius

param application string
param tag string
param port int

resource container 'Applications.Core/containers@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'container'
  properties: {
    application: application
    container: {
      image: 'ghcr.io/radius-project/samples/demo:${tag}'
      ports: {
        web: {
          containerPort: port
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### `app.bicepparam`
```bicep
using 'app.bicep'

param application = ''
param tag = ''
param port = 3000
```

**Sample Output:**
<!--
Provide a sample output for the inputs provided above.
-->
```

> > rad bicep generate-kubernetes app.bicep --parameters @app.bicepparam --parameters tag=latest --parameters appnetworking.bicepparam --outfile app.yaml

Reviewer 6: What is `generate-kubernetes`? Do we need the **@** before **app.bicepparam**? What is **appnetworking.bicepparam**?

> > rad bicep generate-kubernetes app.bicep --parameters @app.bicepparam --parameters tag=latest --parameters appnetworking.bicepparam --outfile app.yaml

Reviewer 7: Could you share some more details on the internals of this?

> > rad bicep generate-kubernetes app.bicep --parameters @app.bicepparam --parameters tag=latest --parameters appnetworking.bicepparam --outfile app.yaml

Reviewer 6: `rad bicep publish` doesn't create a **yaml** file, AFAIK, and it creates ARM JSON Template internally before the publishing. I may have to re-check the logic again.

Generating BicepDeployment resource...
BicepDeployment resource generated at app.yaml

To apply the BicepDeployment resource onto your cluster, run:

> kubectl apply -f app.yaml

Reviewer 6: `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` is going to generate the yaml file. Makes sense. Is `generate-kubernetes` the right name for this?

Reviewer 3: Feels weird to me as well. I suggested `rad bicep publish` above, but it could also be `rad bicep generate-kube-crd`.

Reviewer: Did y'all come to a consensus on this? 

My take is that we shouldn't overload `rad bicep publish` too much from what it currently does (publish Bicep module to OCI registry).

I don't have super strong feelings about whether this is too much overloading or not. Will those commands evolve in the same direction in the future?

Reviewer 3: The simplest thing to do would be just make the `generate-kubernetes` command more precise. I suggest `rad bicep generate-kubernetes-manifest`. The output should be "Generating Kubernetes manifest files..."

```

> #### `app.yaml`

Author: let's align the technical scenarios with the user scenarios

Author: let's write/replace these scenarios with one that has an app/storage account connection

          "type": "string"
        },
        "port": {
          "type": "int"
        }
      },
      "imports": {
        "Radius": {
          "provider": "Radius",
          "version": "latest"
        }
      },
      "resources": {
        "container": {
          "import": "Radius",
          "type": "Applications.Core/containers@2023-10-01-preview",
          "properties": {
            "name": "container",
            "properties": {
              "application": "[parameters('application')]",
              "container": {
                "image": "[format('ghcr.io/radius-project/samples/demo:{0}', parameters('tag'))]",
                "ports": {
                  "web": {
                    "containerPort": "[parameters('port')]"
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  parameters: |
    {
      "application": {
        "value": ""
      },
      "tag": {
        "value": "latest"
      },
      "port": {
        "value": 3000
      }
    }
  bicepconfig: |
    {
      "imports": {
        "Radius": {
          "provider": "Radius",
          "version": "latest"
        }
      }
    }
```

> ### Bicep Module

Reviewer 2: Can you describe why this example fits the user scenario? What is the user achieving through this bicep template?

#### `main.bicep`

> ```bicep

Reviewer 7: A bit confused here, based on the user scenario it sounded like this is a kubernetes manifest and not bicep

`Jon wants to declare all dependencies for his application in Kubernetes manifests, including cloud resources`

Reviewer 7: Maybe a quick comparison of current user flow to proposed flow would help.

              },
              "outputs": {
                "storageAccountId": {
                  "type": "string",
                  "value": "[resourceId('Microsoft.Storage/storageAccounts', parameters('storageAccountName'))]"
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "outputs": {
        "storageAccountId": {
          "type": "string",
          "value": "[reference('storageModule').outputs.storageAccountId.value]"
        }
      }
    }
  parameters: |
    {
      "storageAccountName": {
        "value": "myaccount"
      }
    }
```

## Design

### High Level Design
<!--
High level overview of the data flow and key components.

Provide a high-level description, using diagrams as appropriate, and top-level
explanations to convey the architectural/design overview. Don’t go into a lot
of details yet but provide enough information about the relationship between
these components and other components. Call out or highlight new components
that are not part of this feature (dependencies). This diagram generally
treats the components as black boxes. Provide a pointer to a more detailed
design document, if one exists. 
-->

> This design proposes the creation of two new Kubernetes custom resources and their corresponding controllers: `BicepDeployment` and `BicepDeploymentResource`. The `BicepDeployment` controller will be responsible for deploying resources defined in ARM JSON manifests to Radius, while the `BicepDeploymentResource` controller will be responsible for tracking the state of individual resources. The `BicepDeployment` controller will have a control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation, process deletion, and process creation or update. The `BicepDeploymentResource` controller will have a similar control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation or process deletion if necessary.

Reviewer 6: **BicepDeployment** is a collection of **BicepDeploymentResource** then, right? Will the **BicepDeployment** be creating the **BicepDeploymentResource**s?

> This design proposes the creation of two new Kubernetes custom resources and their corresponding controllers: `BicepDeployment` and `BicepDeploymentResource`. The `BicepDeployment` controller will be responsible for deploying resources defined in ARM JSON manifests to Radius, while the `BicepDeploymentResource` controller will be responsible for tracking the state of individual resources. The `BicepDeployment` controller will have a control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation, process deletion, and process creation or update. The `BicepDeploymentResource` controller will have a similar control loop that will check the status of an in-progress operation or process deletion if necessary.

Reviewer 8: is it in or out of the scope here for detecting a deletion?

### Architecture Diagram
<!--
Provide a diagram of the system architecture, illustrating how different
components interact with each other in the context of this proposal.

Include separate high level architecture diagram and component specific diagrams, wherever appropriate.
-->

> ![Architecture Diagram](2024-08-bicepdeployment-controller/architecture.png)

Reviewer 2: This png is not legible for me when maximized.

	Phrase BicepDeploymentPhrase `json:"phrase,omitempty"`

  // Description is a human-readable description of the status of the Bicep Deployment.
  Description string `json:"description,omitempty"`

  // Resources is a list of resources that are created by the BicepDeployment.
  Resources []BicepDeploymentResourceRef `json:"resources,omitempty"`
}

// BicepDeploymentPhrase is a string representation of the current status of a Bicep Deployment.
type BicepDeploymentPhrase string

const (
	// BicepDeploymentPhraseUpdating indicates that the Bicep Deployment is being updated.
	BicepDeploymentPhraseUpdating BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Updating"

	// BicepDeploymentPhraseReady indicates that the Bicep Deployment is ready.
	BicepDeploymentPhraseReady BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Ready"

	// BicepDeploymentPhraseFailed indicates that the Bicep Deployment has failed.
	BicepDeploymentPhraseFailed BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Failed"

	// BicepDeploymentPhraseDeleting indicates that the Bicep Deployment is being deleted.
	BicepDeploymentPhraseDeleting BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Deleting"

	// BicepDeploymentPhraseDeleted indicates that the Bicep Deployment has been deleted.

> 	BicepDeploymentPhraseDeleted BicepDeploymentPhrase = "Deleted"

Reviewer 9: How long will we keep the resource around, i.e. as 'deleted'? Is clean up implicit or explicit?

)
```

#### BicepDeploymentResource Custom Resource Definition

The `BicepDeploymentResource` CRD is another CRD that will be responsible for tracking the state of individual resources. The CRD will have the following fields:

```go
// BicepDeploymentResourceSpec defines the desired state of a BicepDeployment
type BicepDeploymentResourceSpec struct {
  // ResourceID is the resource ID of the resource to deploy.
  ResourceID string `json:"resourceID"`
}

type BicepDeploymentResourceStatus struct {
  // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for this BicepDeploymentResource.
  ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`

  // Operation tracks the status of an in-progress provisioning operation.

>   Operation *ResourceOperation `json:"operation,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: This is how we will understand if the operation is successful or not or if it is still going on, I believe.

}
```

#### `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` Command

The `rad bicep generate-kubernetes` command will be a new command that will generate a Kubernetes custom resource when provided a Bicep template and its parameters. The command will take the following arguments:

- `-p, --parameters`: The parameters for the Bicep template. Can be specified in the same way as [`rad deploy` parameters](https://edge.docs.radapp.io/reference/cli/rad_deploy/).
- `-o, --outfile`: The path to the output file where the BicepDeployment resource will be written.

#### BicepDeployment Controller

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new controller that reconciles BicepDeployment resources. It will have the following control loop:

1. Check if there is an in-progress operation. If so, check its status:
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile operation and continue processing.
	  2. If the operation completed successfully, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` fields as succeeded. Set the contents of the `status.resources` to match the set of deployed resources. This operation is complete, so we can continue processing.

> 	  3. If the operation failed, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` as failed and continue processing.

Reviewer 6: What if only one of the resources failed? Not all of them? Are we going to do a rollback?

2. If the BicepDeployment is being deleted, then process deletion:
    1. Set the `status.phrase` for the BicepDeployment to `Deleting`, as well as for each of the BicepDeploymentResources that this BicepDeployment has created.
3. If the BicepDeployment is not being deleted then process this as a create or update:
    1. The controller will perform some simple lookups to Radius to determine if the provided template can be deployed:
        - Check if the template contains an empty `param environment`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an environment ID (must have exactly one environment if left unspecified like this) and deploy the template using that environment.

>         - Check if the template contains an empty `param application`. If it does, the controller will query the Radius API to get an application ID. If there is exactly one application present, the controller will deploy the template using that application. If there are no applications, then the controller will create one.

Reviewer 6: Does this mean that the deployment has to belong to an application? Wouldn't an environment be enough for an env-scoped deployment? Do we definitely need an application?

    2. Queue a PUT operation against the Radius API to deploy the ARM JSON.

#### BicepDeploymentResource Controller

The `radius-controller` will be updated to include a new reconciler that reconciles BicepDeploymentResource resources. It will have the following control loop:

1. Check if there is an in-progress operation. If so, check its status:
    1. If the operation is still in progress, then queue another reconcile operation and continue processing.
	  2. If the operation completed successfully, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` fields as succeeded. Set the contents of the `status.resources` to match the set of deployed resources. This operation is complete, so we can continue processing.
	  3. If the operation failed, then update the `status.phrase` and `status.description` as failed and continue processing.
2. If the BicepDeployment is being deleted, then process deletion:

>     1. Send a DELETE operation to the Radius API to delete the resource.

Reviewer 6: What if the resource is not in a Terminal state?
